I want to give you something that is
very contradictory to the talking points
in popular culture about fasting. What I
want to talk about today is something I
specifically went over in my last book,
Weightlifting is a Waste of Time, which
I called the anabolic acceleration
that happens after fasting.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jquish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering. Gives me a
unique perspective beyond a lot of
people who studied sports science to get
some new perspectives on the things we
talk about relating to nutrition, our
health, exercise, and how to be as
optimized as possible.
And today
I want to give you something that is
very contradictory to the talking points
in popular culture about fasting.
So you'll hear from Dr. Peter Otia, a
man I have great respect for, and a lot
of other people that fasting can cause
you to lose muscle. I've always been
into fasting. I've done a lot of it.
I've done five day dry fasts. That means
no food, no water for 5 days. And there
is a lot of clinical research. Well, I
shouldn't say a lot. There's two studies
that study uh that look at dry fasting
and found no ill effects and only
positive effects. So, before somebody
complains that that's irresponsible, no,
it is responsible and there's evidence
behind it. But what I want to talk about
today is something I specifically went
over in my last book, weightlifting is a
waste of time, which I called the
anabolic acceleration
that happens after fasting. We don't
exactly know mechanisms, but we know
it's happening. So, I I think a lot of
times people will do a fast and they'll
drop a bunch of body weight and then
they'll do like a DEXA scan and it'll
say, "Oh, you your your muscle mass is
down."
The problem with that is whenever you
fast because
in that fast you're clearly not having
carbohydrates.
Also, think about that word
carbohydrate.
Carbohydrates make you retain a lot of
water. specifically three grams of water
per gram of carbohydrate you take in. So
every time you fast, you're going to
lose water from organs and musculature.
And because DEXA scans really look at
what is fat mass and then what is not
fat mass, then takes what is not fat
mass and tries to calculate what might
be bone and might be organs based on
mathematics.
It's really difficult to determine
what exactly is going on right after
fast, which is why it's better to
measure after you hydrate to see how
much weight you've lost from a fast. And
most studies that say that fasting
causes you to lose muscle, they don't do
that. So, there's a study I'm going to
talk about and uh I'll I'll put the
reference up
where individuals
who were eating every other day. So,
every other day was a fast and then
consequently every other day they they
would have regular three meals or
whatever they ate before versus a group
that was in calorie restriction. Both
groups lost weight. The fasting group
after a 32- week follow-up kept the
weight off.
The regular calorie restriction group
did not keep the weight off. But what is
so interesting about this is neither
group exercised yet a statistically
significant
amounts of muscle gained in the fasting
group.
Why on earth would that happen? They
didn't train. Why would they just
randomly gain muscle? It's a great
question and we don't have any
mechanisms. So the only thing I can do
is theorize that individuals who are
putting their own biochemistry in that
situation
have an ability or they're signaling
their body perhaps
that they need to be more anabolic so
they can basically get their next meal.
Like if you're starving, your body's
like, "Oh, okay. Maybe we need to make
you more anabolic so you become stronger
so you can go out and get your next
meal. Now, that's a lot of inference I
just did and some jumps that I'm
theorizing about and do not have
evidence to back up, but
I just think it's unfortunate
that people have taken fasting and sort
of thrown it in the trash. Whereas I
think it's one of the best ways to drop
body fat, especially when you do a
protein sparing modified fast, which
actually isn't quite a fast because you
consume high amounts of protein and
nothing else.
And of course, you don't lose nearly as
much water in those types of baths. And
you can gain muscle because if you
really do a deep dive in the literature
and this again falls into the same
category with this anabolic acceleration
postf fast or let's say for argument
sake postc calorie restriction. It's
possible that you're just signaling the
body to either gain more or perhaps
what's happening, here's another theory,
is muscle is actually being gained, like
protein synthesis is happening while
you're in the middle of the fast, but
you can't realize it because that tissue
is not yet hydrated. Maybe what's
happening is we're stimulating and it's
just not really visible until we go back
to a a normal level of hydration. I'm
not sure which one it is, but there is a
library of literature that paints the
opposite story and I want you to know
about it. Fasting is not bad for you,
especially if it's protein sparing
modified fast. I'm going to keep making
videos on this subject so I can be as
absolutely helpful as possible. And uh I
hope this helps. If this video helped
you, I want you to subscribe and follow.
I'm going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.